Sam's Garage

Tucked away at the end of a street in Mercer Island's Roanoke
neighborhood, Sam's house had a more Frank Lloyd Wright vibe
than the rest. The garage on the east side of the house was
filled with shelves and workbenches-a monument to organization
that he enjoyed maintaining. The morning's project was taking a
look at the transmission of his Ford Ranger, which had been
buzzing and emanating a burnt-rubber smell.

Holding a six-pack of India Pale Ale, he walked toward the
garage door and pushed the controller mounted on the wall. As
the door began to chug open, he pulled a rolling stool toward
the front end of the Ranger, crawled inside the cab, and tugged
the lever that popped the hood. As midday breezes wafted into
the space, bottle of ale open and bubbling, he leaned over the
guts of the engine and was immersed in machinery.

Half an hour later, a light knock pulled him out of his
thoughts. He looked up from the engine to see Marco standing in
the driveway. Droplets of rain on his jacket and sweatpants
hinted that he'd been out for a run. Smiling, he stepped
inside. "Hey there, Sam."

"Marco, hi, bud. Nice to see you. What brings you to this neck
of the woods?

"Ah, the usual Saturday stuff. Just wanted to drop by to see
how you're doing."

"I'm glad you did. How are you today?"

"Pretty good. You know." Marco moved closer to the truck,
tipping his head to get a clearer view. "Working on the beast,
huh? What's happening with it?

Sam stepped back, wiping his forehead. "Once again I've got
issues with the transmission. I'm not sure if it needs a new
clutch." He shook his head, crossing his arms. "The damn thing
is aggravating, and I was already feeling down today."

Marco's eyes signaled empathy. "Sorry to hear that. Want to
tell me what's up? I've got time for a conversation."

Sam leaned back against the side panel. "Thanks, I appreciate
that. That's one of the things that I like about you. You're
interested in conversation."

Marco chuckled, then nodded toward the six-pack on the
workbench. "Can I grab one of those?"

Sam smiled. "Sure. Get a cold one and sit down, because I think
this might take a while." He pointed to the red rolling stools
near the west corner of the garage, and they walked toward
them.

Marco popped open a beer, took a sip, and sat. "That's
better. So go ahead-what's on your mind?

Sam lowered his bulk onto the larger stool and took a quiet
moment to collect his thoughts. "Lying in bed this morning, I
noticed a real feeling of sadness. Stuff coming up because of
some old mistakes, old regrets. Like the things I did that
ultimately led to a divorce. I realized I spend a lot of time
looking back, thinking, What was I doing? Where was I? Why did
this happen? How did I not see this? Why did I have everything
and throw it away?"

Marco shook his head. "Wow, bro, sorry to hear about that." He
took a quick sip. "Do you think you've made any progress in
dealing with that or coming to understand what the regret is
all about?"

Sam said, "Some. As you know, I have a laypersons interest in
science. The stuff I mentioned on our hiking in Snohomish when
we talked about free will." Sam entwined his fingers and
propped both fists on his forehead. "I'm on the horns of a
dilemma."

"Yeah? What kind of dilemma?"

"Well, from all the reading I've done, I've come to recognize
that I don't have even a shred of free will. I hate to bring up
the topic, because every time I do, I get blowback. I think you
and I talked about that."

"I think we did."

Sam continued, "I still notice the conditioning that operates
to this day and will till the end of my life. It causes me to
be reluctant. I'm reluctant to bring up the fact that I
betrayed my wife. I cheated on her, had an affair at work, and
hurt her terribly. I feel like shit for having done that, but
the dilemma is that at the same time, I look at the science,
and if I don't have free will, I'm not responsible for what I
did. I'll have to pay the price, I'll have to bear the
consequences, but at the same time, I'm not responsible in the
sense that I could have done anything different in the
moment. It's my belief that I couldn't have done any
different. So it's not like I made a free choice to do what I
did.'

He looked down at the concrete floor, taking in a long
breath. "I did make a choice. We're always making choices. The
thermostat on my wall makes choices twenty times a day-turn on
the furnace or not, turn on the air conditioning or not, but
don't tell me my thermostat has free will. If I make a decision
one way or the other, it's not free will."

Marco took another sip, frowning.

Sam picked at the label on his bottle. "My real dilemma is the
feelings of regret when I know, logically, that they don't have
a basis. I'm still working through this issue, and from time to
time, it makes me sad."

Marco said, "Okay, so I hear you talking about responsibility
and choices. And I think that's a very valuable way to start to
unpack some of the feelings or take a look at them or even
admit that they're there. That's showing a level of
vulnerability, which I have to give you credit for. I'm curious
about the blowback from the choices. Your family, your wife. Is
there a way to come back from that? Make amends for what
happened?"

"I think there is." Sam looked up.

Marco said, "Do you feel the affection or trust or some
connection was lost because of your actions?"

Sam's eyes started to glisten. "Oh yeah. My actions destroyed
the life that I had. I would say that I pretty much lost
everything that I valued. And it's been hard, because I have
been conditioned to believe that it could have been different,
but then I look back on how I destroyed everything that I
loved. That causes a lot of regret. I suffer from that. At the
same time, I don't think it could have been different. If it
could have, I'm looking for the person who can rebut the
argument that we don't have free will." He stood, walking
toward the south wall that was lined with metal shelving and
hand tools. "I don't like talking about this, because most
people have an adverse reaction, and I don't like adverse
reactions."

Marco looked puzzled. "What do you think it would be? Say we're
at our men's group and you bring up the idea that we don't have
free will. What do you think the reaction might be from the men
who are there to do their work?"

Sam shook his head. "First of all, those men are a sample of
the larger population that's conditioned to believe that they
have free will and that they could have done things
differently. It's an interesting thing to explore, because half
of the men there have probably done similar things. They're not
there with clean consciences-they're there because they fucked
up in one way or another."

Marco nodded. "I don't doubt it."

Sam said, "Marco, it's rare for somebody in our society to
reject the idea of agency. Everybody thinks, I have agency. No,
you don't-that's my view. I could be wrong, but somebody would
have to bring me some serious proof."

Marco frowned. "Well, what would you say in the men's group?
That one guy-what's name? The tattooed guy from Indiana?"

Sam grinned ruefully. "Corey?"

"Yeah, him. He's gets in your face sometimes, spouting some of
the shitty stuff that people use as armor. What would you say
to him about feeling regret?"

Sam shook his head. "Corey was in my face a few months ago. It
got very tense. I thought the other guys would have to
intervene."

"Do you mean you'd be fighting? Physically?"

Sam nodded. "We nearly ended up brawling. I thought he was
going to try to take me out, the little shit."

Marco scoffed. "Right."

Sam rubbed his neck. "Today, I don't think people could push my
buttons to that extent. If I was defending someone other than
myself-the people that I love, my family, my children, my
friends-then there would be no stops. If I'm being attacked, I
know, at some level, there's nothing I have to protect. There's
no self that can be injured by somebody else's thoughts and
perceptions of me."

Marco glanced toward the tall pines that lined the
street. "That would be a tough one for Corey or Frank or Shel
or any of the other guys, tough for them to get their heads
wrapped around. I mean, we get into some interesting personal
discussions. The guys talk about their family or their health
issues, or money, or this or that, but it doesn't kind of go
into the philosophical side."

Sam nodded, sipped from his bottle.

Marco said, "Back to your family, your situation with your wife
and maybe with your kids-what do you think happens now that you
have some better information about your own free will or
agency? How can you talk to your loved ones then?"

A cold wind whistled through the garage, and Sam pulled his
jacket closed. "I'm glad you mention information, because
that's really what it is. We change when we get new
information. Sometimes we get new information because we made
the worst mistakes we've ever made. Sadly, or ionically, those
are the experiences that bring us new information that helps us
become better. In my case, all the suffering-and there was
years of it-brought me new information about who I am. I
started to look into that question 'who am I?' It's a question
I take seriously, and I think people should really look at it,
because there's not an obvious answer."

Marco nodded energetically. "You mentioned that during our hike
and kept pressing me with that question. Who am I? Who or what
is the 'I' that asks the question? Do you have some more
thoughts about it that will help me understand?"

Sam sat again. "I do, but I'm not going there right now. I do
want to talk about that with you, because I care about you and
I want the best for you, but right now, I'm struggling with
other stuff. It feels more important to press on with the idea
of suffering. You asked me how I interact now with my family."

"Yeah."

"I've asked myself how somebody recovers from a grave
mistake. They do discover that there are different ways to
respond, and they learn-as I learned-there is no separate
self. I realize I can't be hurt by the things that have
happened, even the mistakes that I've made. I can hold my head
up. I can respond differently. I interact with the people in my
family, and I do try to make amends, but I don't accept the
idea that I could have done something differently than I did in
the past."

Marco said, "Here's the question. I just heard you say you're
learning that you can't be hurt, but what about when other
people are hurt because of something that you have done? What
do you do then?"

"Good question. I try to make amends. I go to them and I
say. 'Look, I see what happened, and I see that I hurt you. I
wish I had done something different. I'm sorry, and I will try
to make amends, if you're open to that. I understand you may
not be, and that's okay, too.'"

Marco nodded. "Is that a conversation you might have with your
ex-wife?"

Sam smiled a bit. "We actually have had conversations like
that, and it helps. We have a better relationship because of
it."

"Good to hear. So you were able to express regret with her and
say I'm sorry?"

"Yes. She's accepted my apology, she understands. Both of us
are terribly sad about what happened and how it
unfolded. Neither of us expected to be divorced at this point
in life, but here we are. I never saw it coming. That's the
nature of life-things happen to us, and eventually you learn
there are things that will happen to you that you never, ever
saw coming."

Sam took a deep breath, scratched his chin. "Some of the
perceptions I had when I was a young man were that bad things
were not going to happen to me. I always said, 'I'm going to be
fine.' In a blink of an eye, shit you never planned for plays
out. Over time, maybe you come to understand the unpredictable
nature of life. Like I've said many times, life just unfolds. I
mean that."

Marco nodded. "You mentioned that on the hiking trip. I still
have that planted in the back of my head, and I'm considering
what that actually means." He stood. "I want to ask one last
question. You said you were kind of feeling down, and it had to
do with past actions. If I understand right, you were
ruminating a bit about your actions and how they could have
been different in the past and then also, how they could not
have been any different. They were what they were, right?"

Sam said, "Yeah, it's a good question. For me, the path was
open. There was no sort of external physical obstacle that kept
me from going a particular direction. I could have not cheated
on her. That path was open physically, but it wasn't open
mentally. Did it happen the way it did given the conditions and
causes that existed at that very moment? Maybe a month later,
it could have been different. Probably would have been."

Marco murmured, "Mm-hmm."

"I don't know if I answered your question very well."

"Well-I think so. I'm kind of wrestling with a lot of these
ideas, but I think there's a glimmer of understanding. I'm just
starting to try to take some steps about regret myself. What do
you want to do at this point in terms of those past events? Is
there any action you want to take?"

Sam sighed, then his face brightened. "Yeah, I want to continue
with what I've been doing. I am working to make amends in a way
that's loving and honest and open. That's all I think I can do
at this point. It may sound trite, but I want to show up as
love. Don't blame people. Accept people for what they are,
where there are, and understand that they're just as helpless
as you are. They're every bit as much a function of what's
happened to them as you are. So what room is there in our
society for anger? What room is there for praise? Why should I
praise someone who does something if they weren't responsible,
if they didn't choose to do that noble action?"

He paused. "I do think there is room. When you praise somebody,
it has an effect on them. It matters whether the praise is
legitimate or not. They might see it as legitimate, even if you
don't. If you praise them, they may do more of that action, so
I think it's good to just show up as kind and loving and
compassionate. That's really what I'm trying to do with the
rest of my life. That's why I'm in the men's group, because I
want to show up as a kind and good. It's not easy in our
society."

Marco rubbed his hands against the tops of his thighs. "And it
seems like there's contradiction everywhere. There may be value
in making amends. There may be value in praising someone for
something. There may be value in showing up as kindness or as
love. At the same time, you talked about this idea of no self,
and not having choice over what happened in the past, no choice
in what's happening right now in the present. Life just is what
it is." He frowned. "It sounds like a whole lot of
contradictory ideas going on there."

Sam chuckled. "You're right. We live in the conceptual
realm. When we try to figure things out, we're going to be led
to contradictions, because the conceptual realm is not all of
reality. Maybe it's a big illusion. I don't have more to say
about that, because I think there are things that are beyond
words and letters."

They both smiled, listening to a dog barking a few houses away.

Sam continued, "So why should we be surprised that we see
contradictions? Who guaranteed us the ability to sit here and
reason with our primate brains and not wind up with a bunch of
contradictions?"

Marco finished his beer and sat the bottle on the floor with a
clink. "That was my thought. We are primates with big brains,
and we've evolved to that point where we have both emotions and
logic, and we have feelings and thoughts, and we have choice,
but no choice. And we have reality but non-reality. We can
consider these lofty words and concepts, but at the same time,
it's very hard to understand what they are or have an
experiential feeling of what they mean. I think that's the part
I still struggle with-the experiential part outside of
thought."

Sam nodded. "Yep. I'm often stuck in that place."

"That happens to you as well? Seriously?"

Sam leaned back against the truck. "Marco, I don't want you to
have the idea that I have everything figured out or that I've
arrived, whatever that means. I think I'm better off than I was
twenty years ago, but I still have questions from time to
time."

Marco reached out toward the six pack and chuckled. "Given
enough time, we'll figure it out."
